---
layout: post
title: Numpy Masked Arrays
---

I have a 2D numpy array of data generated from topography. One of these columns of
data is a mean slope value and for the analysis I am performing I want to filter out
any row which has a mean slope value above 0.4.

I could do this by filtering the data as it is read from the file, but this is pretty
slow, and I will run into problems of being unable to preallocating the array. One solution would
be to traverse each data file twice, once to count the instances of slope > 0.4
and once to allocate the valid data to the array. I want to avoid this as the files are
fairly large and this seems very clumsy.

So I started looking at [masked arrays](http://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/reference/maskedarray.html) in numpy,
I have used them before to filter no data values out of raster plots:

{% highlight py linenos %}
#load hillshade data into a numpy array, hillshade
hillshade, hillshade_header = raster.read_flt(data_path + hillshade_file)

#ignore nodata values
hillshade = np.ma.masked_where(hillshade == -9999, hillshade)
{% endhighlight %}

But what if I want to filter a row based on a value in a single column? I found [this
answer](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/4625744/mask-a-2d-numpy-array-based-on-values-in-one-column)
on stackoverflow which got me most of the way there.

First we delare a test array, a:

{% highlight py %}

import numpy as np

a = np.array([[8, 5, 0.1],
              [2, 4, 0.39],
              [3, 1, 0.45]])

{% endhighlight %}

Next we create the masked array

{% highlight py %}

masked_a =  np.ma.MaskedArray(a, mask=(np.ones_like(a)*(a[:,2]>0.4)).T)

{% endhighlight %}

The `mask=` section is creating a row mask based on the condition `>0.4` in the last column.
`np.ones_like(a)` creates a new array of the same shape as `a` filled with ones:

{% highlight py %}
[[ 1.  1.  1.]
 [ 1.  1.  1.]
 [ 1.  1.  1.]]
{% endhighlight %}

`(a[:,2]>0.4)` evaluates the expression `>0.4` for each cell in column 2 of the array,
resulting in:

{% highlight py %}
[False False True]
{% endhighlight %}

This is a 1D array, where the `True` corresponds to the value `a[2][2]` but if we multiply
this array with the 2D array of ones, we get:

{% highlight py %}
[[ 0.  0.  1.]
 [ 0.  0.  1.]
 [ 0.  0.  1.]]
{% endhighlight %}

Nearly there! Now we just use `.T` to transpose the array, effectively rotating it through
90 degrees. So now we can check out our mask, and the masked data:

{% highlight py %}
a2 =
[[8.0 5.0 0.1]
 [2.0 4.0 0.39]
 [-- -- --]]

a2.mask =
[[False False False]
 [False False False]
 [ True  True  True]]

{% endhighlight %}

Unfortunately this transpose trick only works with arrays where `dim1 == dim2`
so in our example we had a 3*3 array. My real data is not so square. But as is almost
always the case, [someone else has had this problem before](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/15773570/trying-to-mask-2d-numpy-arrays-based-on-values-in-one-column)

The solution is to use `np.newaxis` which ensures that the mask is created in the
same dimensions as the input array, `a`. The final steps are as follows:

{% highlight py linenos %}

a = np.array([[8, 5, 9, 0.1],
              [2, 4, 5, 0.39],
              [3, 1, 4, 0.45]])

mask = np.empty(a.shape,dtype=bool)
mask[:,:] = (a[:,3] > 0.4)[:,np.newaxis]
masked_a = np.ma.MaskedArray(a,mask=mask)

>>> masked_a
masked_array(data =
 [[8.0 5.0 9.0 0.1]
 [2.0 4.0 5.0 0.39]
 [-- -- -- --]],
             mask =
 [[False False False False]
 [False False False False]
 [ True  True  True  True]],
       fill_value = 1e+20)

final_a = np.ma.compress_rowcols(masked_a,axis=0)

>>> final_a
array([[ 8.  ,  5.  ,  9.  ,  0.1 ],
       [ 2.  ,  4.  ,  5.  ,  0.39]])


{% endhighlight %}

The final step uses `np.ma.compress_rowcols` to get rid of the rows that are masked out,
this is not always needed, but will make my life easier for my current project.
